Here I provides a emacs auto complete package based on auto-complete, auto-complete-clang, yasnippet and autopairs.

I had add some objc snippet to yasnippet to help you write code more quick and convenient.

Also auto-complete-clang.el had been modified a lot to make objc auto-complete better.

Assumption you did not had such mode installed for emacs. If you already had these mode installed, modified it according to your environment.

Assumption you installed all toolchain components as "Howto". If not, you need change the path as where they installed.

=Fix header locations in iPhoneOS5.0.sdk=
All framworks header files installed in   */usr/share/iPhoneOS5.0.sdk/System/Library/Frameworks* , to help clang find proper header files, we need copy all framework headers to standard include path.
{{{
$cd /usr/share/iPhoneOS5.0.sdk/System/Library/Frameworks/
}}}

write a shell script "cpheader.sh" here, put all below contents in it.
{{{
for i in *.framework
do
     f=`basename $i .framework`
     echo $f
     mkdir -p /usr/share/iPhoneOS5.0.sdk/usr/include/$f
     if [ -d $i/Headers ]; then
     cp -Rf -p $i/Headers/* /usr/share/iPhoneOS5.0.sdk/usr/include/$f/
     fi
done
}}}

Run the script to copy headers
{{{
$sh cpheader.sh
}}}

After it finished, all framework headers will be copy to /usr/share/iPhoneOS5.0.sdk/usr/include/<framework name> folders.

=Emacs setup=
Download it from:
http://ios-toolchain-based-on-clang-for-linux.googlecode.com/files/ios-complete-for-emacs.tar.gz

Extract it:
{{{
mkdir -p ~/.emacs.d
tar zxvf ios-complete-for-emacs.tar.gz -C ~/.emacs.d
cat ~/.emacs.d/DotEmacs >~/.emacs
}}}

=Launch It=
Run emacs, write some code, include proper header files.

When you want to auto-complete symbols,  press <font color="red"> "Ctrl+Enter"</font>.

You can use 'tab' key to jump to next args.

